Allow platforms to provide run image sboms (#211)
buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-run-image-sbom.md

- Define the target persona: platform operator, platform implementor, end user.
- If applicable, provide sample error messages, deprecation warnings, or migration guidance.
  - The lifecycle could warn if a usable run image sbom is not provided.

Example invocation:
* build: `/cnb/lifecycle/exporter -run-image my-run-image -run-image-sbom <path or directory - e.g., ./my-run-image-sbom.json> my-app-image`
* rebase: `/cnb/lifecycle/rebaser -run-image my-new-run-image -run-image-sbom <path or directory - e.g., ./my-new-run-image-sbom.json> my-app-image`

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

## Build

Following the build invocation above, the exported app image would contain:
* `my-run-image-sbom.json` somewhere in `/layers/sbom`; suggestions:
  * `/layers/sbom/launch/base/sbom.<ext>` (this would make `base` a reserved buildpack id)
  * `/layers/sbom/launch/run-image/sbom.<ext>` (this would make `run-image` a reserved buildpack id)
  * `/layers/sbom/run-image/sbom.<ext>`
  * ?

> * An `io.buildpacks.sbom.base` label containing the diffID of the layer containing the run image sbom

Author: Though `io.buildpacks.base.sbom` was discussed previously, I like `io.buildpacks.sbom.base` because it is more consistent with the directory structure `/layers/sbom/launch/base` and thus easier to reason about.

Reviewer: One of the things that have helped in the past is to look at the context of where this would exist. What do the other labels look like? Especially the ones related to other base image information or SBOM?

Author: Good point. The closest I could find is the `io.buildpacks.stack.XXX` labels. Which I guess would mean `io.buildpacks.base.sbom` makes more sense. I'll change it.

* The run image is swapped for a new run image that does not have a `io.buildpacks.sbom.base` label. In this scenario, there are a couple things that could occur:
  * The lifecycle could run `genpkgs` to produce a run image sbom for use during export
  * The lifecycle could return the new run image reference to the platform, expecting the platform to locate an sbom

## With pack

`pack` could make use of the preparer binary described below to download a run image sbom prior to running the exporter. When Dockerfiles are supported, the preparer invocation would need to happen after the `extender` has run to cover the case where a new run image is selected.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this? Leaving the location of the run image sbom unspec'd (as opposed to baking it into the run image at a specific location) could make it harder for logic-less platforms like Tekton to use the creator.

## preparer binary

> * A possible mitigation to the drawback noted above would be a CNB-provided "prepare" operation ([currently under discussion](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/202)) could make this easier. For example, a preparer could look for a run image sbom in a file, attestation, attachment, or layer (picking the first one it finds) and provide the data as a file to the creator. The Tekton task that uses the creator currently already has a ["prepare" step](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/4bf8b57aa105f0c7ce05fc122a11b1b0d5822fcd/task/buildpacks/0.3/buildpacks.yaml#L70-L121) which could be modified to invoke a preparer binary.

Author: The preparer could even run `genpkgs` if no SBOM is found

- What is the impact of not doing this? Each platform will have to come up with its own way of attaching run image sboms to the app image.

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- [#RFC 95: Structured SBOMs](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0095-sbom.md)

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What should be the path of the run image sbom within the image?
- How should the layer containing the run image sbom be designated? This layer containing the buildpack-provided sbom is referenced in the `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata` label with key `sbom`. #186 proposed `io.buildpacks.base.sbom` for the layer containing the run image sbom, and `io.buildpacks.app.sbom` for the layer containing the buildpack-provided sbom (in addition to `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata`).
- What should be all the accepted media types / extensions?

- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?
  - The existence or behavior of a preparer binary that knows how to download run image sboms.

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)

> [spec-changes]: #spec-changes

Reviewer: Should this section be filled in?

- Attestation: authenticated metadata about one or more software artifacts, as per the SLSA Attestation Model (see [here](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation) and [here](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign#in-toto-attestations)).
- Cosign sbom attachment: an sbom object represented as an OCI Image Manifest V1 (see [here](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/main/specs/SBOM_SPEC.md)).

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

This RFC serves as an addendum to [#RFC 95: Structured SBOMs](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0095-sbom.md), which introduced a structured way for buildpacks to provide an sbom for dependencies installed at build time. For a full depiction of dependencies within a container image, container scanning tools would _also_ need an sbom for OS packages that were installed on the run image when it was created.

> # What it is

Reviewer 2: Could we get some prose here just describing what is being proposed in this RFC beyond just the example invocation?

> [what-it-is]: #what-it-is

Author: ```suggestion
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

```suggestion
# What it is

This RFC proposes a mechanism for platforms to supply the SBOM for a run image at build time, leaving the method of storing and associating the SBOM to the run image unspec'd. The lifecycle would ingest the provided SBOM and place it in a spec'd location in the final app image. A label would be used to designate the layer containing the SBOM for the run image.
```
```

- Define the target persona: platform operator, platform implementor, end user.
- If applicable, provide sample error messages, deprecation warnings, or migration guidance.
  - The lifecycle could warn if a usable run image sbom is not provided.

> Example invocation: `/cnb/lifecycle/exporter -run-image my-run-image -run-image-sbom my-run-image-sbom.json my-app-image`

Reviewer: Would it be possible for a platform to provide the sbom in various formats? For example, say `syft` and `cyclonedx`.

I was sort of expecting run image sboms to be more of a directory of "stuff" that would be copied over to their appropriate location.

Author: I am assuming when a directory is provided, we'd like to validate that the files inside all have supported extensions?

Author: Added in latest commit

> Example invocation: `/cnb/lifecycle/exporter -run-image my-run-image -run-image-sbom my-run-image-sbom.json my-app-image`

Author: ```suggestion
Example invocation: `/cnb/lifecycle/exporter -run-image my-run-image -run-image-sbom <path or directory> my-app-image`
```

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

Following the invocation above, the exported app image would contain:

> * `my-run-image-sbom.json` somewhere in `/layers/sbom`; suggestions:

Reviewer: This seems like an open question that should be resolved as part of this RFC.

Author: It's noted under unresolved questions ;)

  * `/layers/sbom/launch/run-image/sbom.<ext>` (this would make `run-image` a reserved buildpack id)
  * `/layers/sbom/run-image/sbom.<ext>`

>   * ?

Author: I like `/layers/sbom/launch/base` or `/layers/sbom/launch/base-image`.

Author: On further reflection, went with `/layers/sbom/launch/base-image` as this seems less likely to have buildpack ID collisions.

The accepted media types would be:
* `application/vnd.cyclonedx+json` with ext `cdx.json`
* `application/spdx+json` with ext `spdx.json`

> * `application/vnd.syft+json` with ext `syft.json`

Reviewer 3: Related to https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/issues/828, these media types need to be accepted with parameters (e.g. version) so that end users / buildpack authors can maintain stronger contracts about the schema versions of the SBOMs that come out of builds.

Author: Thinking about how buildpacks "declare" the media types they support, in buildpack.toml - would we want to do the same for the run image? For example, to put a label on the final app image alerting vulnerability scanners which formats are supported. We could put the supported types in a label on the run image. We'd need to take care during rebase that the label is still accurate.

Author: Added in latest commit - but since we'd be deriving the media type from the file extension, I'm not sure how to derive the parameter. Could we have more flexible file names? Could the platform provide the media type as a separate argument?

* others?

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> Why should we *not* do this? Leaving the location of the run image sbom unspec'd could make it harder for logic-less platforms like Tekton to use the creator. However, a CNB-provided "prepare" operation ([currently under discussion](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/202)) could make this easier. For example, a preparer could look for a run image sbom in a file, attestation, attachment, or layer (picking the first one it finds) and provide the data as a file to the creator. The Tekton task that uses the creator currently already has a ["prepare" step](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/4bf8b57aa105f0c7ce05fc122a11b1b0d5822fcd/task/buildpacks/0.3/buildpacks.yaml#L70-L121) which could be modified to invoke a preparer binary.

Reviewer: I'm a little confused by this statement to be honest. It starts off by sounding like a justification instead of a drawback but then goes into other possible solutions 🤔 ?

Author: Re-worded the first sentence to (hopefully) be less confusing.

> Why should we *not* do this? Leaving the location of the run image sbom unspec'd could make it harder for logic-less platforms like Tekton to use the creator. However, a CNB-provided "prepare" operation ([currently under discussion](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/202)) could make this easier. For example, a preparer could look for a run image sbom in a file, attestation, attachment, or layer (picking the first one it finds) and provide the data as a file to the creator. The Tekton task that uses the creator currently already has a ["prepare" step](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/4bf8b57aa105f0c7ce05fc122a11b1b0d5822fcd/task/buildpacks/0.3/buildpacks.yaml#L70-L121) which could be modified to invoke a preparer binary.

Author: ```suggestion
Why should we *not* do this? Leaving the location of the run image sbom unspec'd (as opposed to baking it into the run image at a specific location) could make it harder for logic-less platforms like Tekton to use the creator. 
* Possible mitigation: a CNB-provided "prepare" operation ([currently under discussion](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/202)) could make this easier. For example, a preparer could look for a run image sbom in a file, attestation, attachment, or layer (picking the first one it finds) and provide the data as a file to the creator. The Tekton task that uses the creator currently already has a ["prepare" step](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/4bf8b57aa105f0c7ce05fc122a11b1b0d5822fcd/task/buildpacks/0.3/buildpacks.yaml#L70-L121) which could be modified to invoke a preparer binary.
```

# Alternatives

> [alternatives]: #alternatives

Reviewer: Wasn't there an alternative discussed where we would leave it up to the platform to determine the method of attaching an sbom? For instance, if our platform want to use more of an associative artifact (similar to cosign) we could do that. It seems like this RFC only proposes one of what I see possibly being many ways for platforms to want to add this feature. Would it be better if we spec'd out the possible options and a way for further tools to be able to discover how the run image sbom is attached to the app image?

For example, some label that states a) "it's this layer here", or b) "it's located at this URI".

Author: I think there are two problems to solve here - one is how to attach or associate an SBOM with the run image. The other is how to attach or associate an SBOM with a CNB-built app image. This RFC is essentially saying we shouldn't worry about the first issue. As for the second issue, this RFC proposes staying consistent with the pattern introduced in https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0095-sbom.md and put the run image sbom somewhere in `/layers/sbom`.

  * Special tooling is required to create the run image (because we don't know the diffID ahead of time)
  * The run image may [fall out of date](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/186#discussion_r773246636) in a way that is not obvious
  * We don't want to "pick a winner" just yet for the mechanism for attaching sboms to the run image
- Why is this proposal the best? This frees platforms to choose their own method of attaching sboms to the run image, while providing a standardized way to consume a complete sbom for the app image.
- What is the impact of not doing this? Each platform will have to come up with its own way of attaching run image sboms to the app image.

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- [#RFC 95: Structured SBOMs](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0095-sbom.md)

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What should be the path of the run image sbom within the image?

> - How should the layer containing the run image sbom be designated? This layer containing the buildpack-provided sbom is referenced in the `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata` label with key `sbom`.

Author: ```suggestion
- How should the layer containing the run image sbom be designated? This layer containing the buildpack-provided sbom is referenced in the `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata` label with key `sbom`. #186 proposed `io.buildpacks.base.sbom` for the layer containing the run image sbom, and `io.buildpacks.app.sbom` for the layer containing the buildpack-provided sbom (in addition to `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata`).
```

> - Should the run image sbom be part of the layer containing the buildpack-provided launch sboms? This layer is referenced in the `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata` label with key `sbom`. Is there a better layer / label?

Author: Thinking on this further, there should be a separate layer - because otherwise that would break rebase. We'll need a new label.

> - Should the run image sbom be part of the layer containing the buildpack-provided launch sboms? This layer is referenced in the `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata` label with key `sbom`. Is there a better layer / label?

Author: ```suggestion
- How should the layer containing the run image sbom be designated? This layer containing the buildpack-provided sbom is referenced in the `io.buildpacks.lifecycle.metadata` label with key `sbom`.
```

- What should be all the accepted media types / extensions?

- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?
  - The existence or behavior of a preparer binary that knows how to download run image sboms.

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
[spec-changes]: #spec-changes

> Does this RFC entail any proposed changes to the core specifications or extensions? New field on the exporter. Potentially a new label.

Author: ```suggestion
Does this RFC entail any proposed changes to the core specifications or extensions? New fields on the exporter and rebaser. A new label on the app image to designate the layer containing the run image sbom.
```

* The run image is swapped for a new run image that does not have a `io.buildpacks.sbom.base` label. In this scenario, there are a couple things that could occur:
  * The lifecycle could run `genpkgs` to produce a run image sbom for use during export
  * The lifecycle could return the new run image reference to the platform, expecting the platform to locate an sbom

## With pack

`pack` could make use of the preparer binary described below to download a run image sbom prior to running the exporter. When Dockerfiles are supported, the preparer invocation would need to happen after the `extender` has run to cover the case where a new run image is selected.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this? Leaving the location of the run image sbom unspec'd (as opposed to baking it into the run image at a specific location) could make it harder for logic-less platforms like Tekton to use the creator.

## preparer binary

> * A possible mitigation to the drawback noted above would be a CNB-provided "prepare" operation ([currently under discussion](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/202)) could make this easier. For example, a preparer could look for a run image sbom in a file, attestation, attachment, or layer (picking the first one it finds) and provide the data as a file to the creator. The Tekton task that uses the creator currently already has a ["prepare" step](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/4bf8b57aa105f0c7ce05fc122a11b1b0d5822fcd/task/buildpacks/0.3/buildpacks.yaml#L70-L121) which could be modified to invoke a preparer binary.

Author: ```suggestion
* A possible mitigation to the drawback noted above would be a CNB-provided "prepare" operation ([currently under discussion](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/202)). For example, a preparer could look for a run image sbom in a file, attestation, attachment, or layer (picking the first one it finds) and provide the data as a file to the creator. The Tekton task that uses the creator currently already has a ["prepare" step](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/4bf8b57aa105f0c7ce05fc122a11b1b0d5822fcd/task/buildpacks/0.3/buildpacks.yaml#L70-L121) which could be modified to invoke a preparer binary.
```
